Add guidance for modeling roles (#1048)
openfga/openfga.dev: docs/content/best-practices/modeling-roles.mdx

```yaml
- user: role:acme-project-admin#assignee
  relation: can_delete_project
  object: organization:acme
```

You do not need to add these tuples when adding the new permission. End-users will add the new permission to their custom roles when they find it appropiate.

### Pros and Cons

**✅ Advantages:**
- Supports user-defined roles
- Flexible permission assignment
- No model changes needed for new role instances

**❌ Disadvantages:**
- More complex than static relations
- Requires additional tuples for role-permission mapping

---

## Approach 3: Role Assignments

The previous approach works well when custom roles are global for the organization. However, if you need roles that can be attached to different object instances with different members for each instance, you need role assignments.

### Example: Project-Specific Admin Roles

Let's say you want a "Project Admin" role where each project can have different admins, but the role permissions remain consistent.

### Step 1: Define the Role Template

Define a `role` type where you list all the permissions that the role can have:

```dsl.openfga
model
  schema 1.1

type role
  relations
    define can_view_project: [user:*]

>     define can_edit_project: [user:*]

Author: @rhamzeh what do you mean? I missed the change

In this guide, we'll explore common approaches to modeling roles with <ProductName format={ProductNameFormat.ShortForm}/>.

## When to Use Each Approach

Before diving into implementation details, here's a quick guide to help you choose the right approach:

| Approach                      | Best For                           | Complexity | Flexibility | Example                                                        
|-------------------------------|------------------------------------|------------|-------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Relations as Roles**        | Static, predefined roles           | Low        | Low         | In all instances, company admins can view project information.                                                     |
| **Simple User-Defined Roles** | User-defined roles at org level    | Medium     | Medium      | Company Acme creates an "Auditor" role that is configured to view project information for all projects.            |

> | **Role Assignments**          | Instance-specific role assignments | High       | High        | In Company Acme, Anne can be a custom Auditor role for Projects 1 and 5, but Beth can be an Auditor on Project 3.  |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Role Assignments**          | Instance-specific role assignments | High       | High        | In Company Acme, Anne can be a custom "Auditor" for Projects 1 and 5, while Bob can be an "Auditor" on Project 3.  |
```
Holdover comment remaining from last set of comments:
- Rephrased slightly for clarity (Code Rabbit has a similar nitpick comment).
- Double-quoted "Auditor" for consistency with row 2 above. 
- Suggest changing name to "Bob" to match the sample store example.

---
title: Modeling roles
slug: /best-practices/modeling-roles

> description: Various ways of modeling static and dynamic roles in FGA - both coarse and fine-grained.

Reviewer: Description might need to change depending on your thoughts about my comment about "static/dynamic" on [#L19]( https://github.com/openfga/openfga.dev/pull/1048/files#diff-c5a407cc4004ce4f8a829442432e8780f276cc3c44b9cc2f8d8c5546d7396fe9R19).

sidebar_position: 1
---
import {
  ProductName,
  ProductNameFormat,
  RelatedSection,
} from '@components/Docs';

# Modeling Roles

Roles are a common way to group users and assign permissions to those groups. They can be used to simplify permission management, especially in larger systems where users may have similar access needs.

In this guide, we'll explore common approaches to modeling roles with <ProductName format={ProductNameFormat.ShortForm}/>.

> ## When to Use Each Approach

Reviewer: With three approaches, the name of each Approach will be important for people to remember it as they learn it.

Do you have a desire to push the term "dynamic"? If there weren't "Role Assignments", then static and dynamic would describe things well. But introducing Role Assignments makes "dynamic" less meaningful because Role Assignments themselves are also a type of "dynamic roles", albeit more flexible and complex. I suppose the static vs dynamic terms are analogous to compile-time vs run-time but that analogy is not obvious to a reader without an explanation.

"User-defined" resonated when reading through the approaches. I realize it's the same terminology problem as "dynamic", but "user-defined" definitely explains what is being done WRT to predefined roles.

Just a suggestion. Maybe:
- Relations as Roles
- Simple User-Defined Roles
- Role Assignments

Before diving into implementation details, here's a quick guide to help you choose the right approach:

| Approach                 | Best For                           | Complexity | Flexibility | Example                                                        
|--------------------------|------------------------------------|------------|-------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Relations as Roles**   | Static, predefined roles           | Low        | Low         | In all instances, company admins can view project information.                                                  |
| **Simple Dynamic Roles** | User-defined roles at org level    | Medium     | Medium      | Company Acme creates an 'Auditors' role that is configured to view project information for all projects.        |
| **Role Assignments**     | Instance-specific role assignments | High       | High        | In Company Acme, Anne can be custom Auditor role for Project 1 and 5, but Beth can be an Auditor on Project 3.  |

> ## Approach 1: Roles as Relations

Reviewer: Doesn't match the entry in the table above, "Relations as Roles". IMO, "Relations as Roles" is more correct.

- Supports user-defined roles
- Flexible permission assignment
- No model changes needed for new role instances

**❌ Disadvantages:**
- More complex than static relations
- Requires additional tuples for role-permission mapping

---

## Approach 3: Role Assignments

The previous approach works well when custom roles are global for the organization. However, if you need roles that can be attached to different object instances with different members for each instance, you need role assignments.

### Example: Project-Specific Admin Roles

Let's say you want a "Project Admin" role where each project can have different admins, but the role permissions remain consistent.

### Step 1: Define the Role and its Permissions

Define a `role` type where you list all the permissions that any role can have:

```dsl.openfga
model
  schema 1.1

type role
  relations
    define can_view_project: [user:*]
    define can_edit_project: [user:*]
```

In order to create a particular "Project Viewer" role, write tuples tying `user:*` the particular permissions this role has, in this case, `can_view_project`. A "Project Admin" role can have `can_view_project` and `can_edit_project`

```yaml

> # Project Viewer role only has the can view project assigned
> - user: user:*
>   relation: can_view_project
>   object: role:project-viewer
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
If the "Project Viewer" is indeed extraneous, then this goes away too.

Author: @dyeam0 I missed why "Project Viewer" can be extraneous :)

Reviewer: You wanted the "Project Viewer", so not extraneous. :D.

I was comparing to the [role-assignments](https://github.com/openfga/sample-stores/tree/main/stores/role-assignments) in sample-stores. Your sample store did a really good job of showing role assignments, with just a `project-admin` and `project-admin-openfga` examples. Similarly here, this guide is able to fully explain role assignments using only the "Project Admin" example. The "Project Viewer" adds an extra role that doesn't seem needed (to me) to explain the concept of the role assignments.

If you still want to include the "Project Viewer", then for completeness of the example I think adding some tuples in Step 3.1 would help:
```
- user: user:bob
  relation: assignee
  object: role_assignment:project-viewer-openfga

- user: role:project-viewer
  relation: role
  object: role_assignment:project-viewer-openfga
```
And Step 3.2:
```
- user: role_assignment:project-viewer-openfga
  relation: role_assignment
  object: project:openfga
```

It is a very strong teaching and learning technique when theory is paired with practical, ie. this guide (theory) is paired with its matching sample store model (practical example). At the bottom of Approach 3, we could link to the [role-assignments](https://github.com/openfga/sample-stores/tree/main/stores/role-assignments) sample store.

# Project Admin role has both the can view project and can edit project assigned
- user: user:*
  relation: can_view_project
  object: role:project-admin

- user: user:*
  relation: can_edit_project
  object: role:project-admin
```

### Step 2: Assign Users to a Role on an Entity

Add a `role_assignment` type to assign users to the role:

```dsl.openfga
type role_assignment
  relations
    define assignee: [user]
    define role: [role]

    define can_view_project: assignee and can_view_project from role
    define can_edit_project: assignee and can_edit_project from role
```

### Step 3: Connect to Your Objects

Define an `organization` type with an `admin` role. Then, define a `project` type that links to an `organization` and a `role_assignment`. Note that we are combining a static `admin` role with custom role assignments. We recommend to always use static roles when they are known in advance.

```dsl.openfga
type organization 
  relations
    define admin: [user]

type project
  relations
    define organization: [organization]
    define role_assignment: [role_assignment]
    

>     # combine role-based and static permissions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # combine role assignments and static permissions
```
I _think_ it's supposed to say "role assignments", because the whole article is about role-based, but three different ReBAC approaches.
